"Lachenmann once described beauty as the rejection of habit. The idea that beauty is so much tied in with the idea of resistance in the work." 

"In camp, too, a man might draw the attention of a comrade working next to him to a nice view of the setting sun shining through the tall trees of the Bavarian woods (as in the famous water color by Dürer), the same woods in which we had built an enormous, hidden munitions plant. One evening, when we were already resting on the floor of our hut, dead tired, soup bowls in hand, a fellow prisoner rushed in and asked us to run out to the assembly grounds and see the wonderful sunset. Standing outside we saw sinister clouds glowing in the west and the whole sky alive with clouds of ever-changing shapes and colors, from steel blue to blood red. The desolate great mud huts provided a sharp contrast, while the puddles on the muddy ground reflected the glowing sky. Then, after minutes of moving silence, one prisoner said to another, 'How beautiful the world COULD be!'"

Romanticism : {

"Language of music centered around notions of gestures, how we express ourselves. It's something that, I think, as composers we can never get around. Whenever we sit down to kind of draw relationships between things in the score, and whenever we attempt to express ourselves, ultimately, we get into this thorny area of musical language: the desire to express."

Die Strukturklang: "A conflict between language and the body."

Lachenmann: An expression of the body. 

"The materiality of sound and the desire to express things through sound don't always match up, because materiality is something that is part of the real world. It resists us trying to enframe it and control it."

"In both someone like Schoenberg and Lachenmann: With the notion of language, one can always point to at least one stable subject position within the music. A point in which one is speaking, whether one is speaking in terms of a psychological reaction, or one is speaking in terms of a pure physical reaction."

"The notion of the gesture is always centered in some way. Language always has some kind of hierarchical basis to rely on."

"We see this in Lachenmann especially in the later works. The danger, I would argue, with the later works is that noise becomes less and less of a kind of *resistance to the desire of expression,* and becomes more like a filter. When you enter into a situation like that, then the music takes on a nostalgic aspect. Like hearing Strauss or Bruckner through a broken radio."

}

"Creating a music in which there is never any possibility for a stable subject position to speak."

"Fundamental sense of instability with a given gesture."

Question: Are gestures not inherently interpretive objects ? If we do not desire to be interpreted, must we not avoid the gesture ?

"Achieving a kind of music that escapes a human intentionality . . . or at least that the human desire is placed in the margins."

When we dive deep into the materialist aspect of music, we can neglect ( positively ) the often unexamined elements of gesture, cadence, expressivity; in other words the familiar patterns of tonal/traditional music. 

Listen: Zimmerman, die soldaten 

Awareness of lachenmannian "aura:" external associations that music/sound can have 

Question: can we totally eradicate aura ?

"Do I want to be spending the rest of my life writing these, perhaps beautiful, noise pieces, but that ultimately are stuck within their own world? Then the danger is that you're producing merely decorative works."

^^^ Is the gesture in this context merely decorative ? Again, are they not inherently interpretive/referential ?

The trend is that experimentation in today's music has an attitude of entertainment: It lacks seriousness, it is decisively anti-intellectual. 

Listen: Kunqu opera 

Total alienation of the listener renders them entirely passive. Meditative listening, Texturklang, engenders a passivity which does not change the way they see the world. It is, again, entertainment-oriented. 

"Musical works should somehow approach the complexity of the world that's out there, and the world is far more complex than any kind of single mind or imagination."

"Patience is more important than imagination."

"The materials we bring into the work are far more complex than anything we could ever know about them."

Polyphony means no domination. Voices are able to speak without being hierarchically dominated by one another. 

"It is important that if at first the work resists us, then we go back to it."

". . . to re-situate ourselves in a much more complex world where we, as individuals, are a just a small part."

